The Project Gutenberg EBook of Oliver Twist, by Charles Dickens

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Oliver Twist

Author: Charles Dickens

Posting Date: October 10, 2008 [EBook #730]
Release Date: November, 1996

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLIVER TWIST ***




Produced by Peggy Gaugy and Leigh Little.  HTML version by Al Haines.









OLIVER TWIST

OR

THE PARISH BOY'S PROGRESS


BY

CHARLES DICKENS




CONTENTS

       I  TREATS OF THE PLACE WHERE OLIVER TWIST WAS BORN AND OF THE
          CIRCUMSTANCES ATTENDING HIS BIRTH
      II  TREATS OF OLIVER TWIST'S GROWTH, EDUCATION, AND BOARD
     III  RELATES HOW OLIVER TWIST WAS VERY NEAR GETTING A PLACE WHICH
          WOULD NOT HAVE BEEN A SINECURE
      IV  OLIVER, BEING OFFERED ANOTHER PLACE, MAKES HIS FIRST ENTRY INTO
          PUBLIC LIFE
       V  OLIVER MINGLES WITH NEW ASSOCIATES.  GOING TO A FUNERAL FOR THE
          FIRST TIME, HE FORMS AN UNFAVOURABLE NOTION OF HIS MASTER'S
          BUSINESS
      VI  OLIVER, BEING GOADED BY THE TAUNTS OF NOAH, ROUSES INTO ACTION,
          AND RATHER ASTONISHES HIM
     VII  OLIVER CONTINUES REFRACTORY
    VIII  OLIVER WALKS TO LONDON.  HE ENCOUNTERS ON THE ROAD A STRANGE
          SORT OF YOUNG GENTLEMAN
      IX  CONTAINING FURTHER PARTICULARS CONCERNING THE PLEASANT OLD
          GENTLEMAN, AND HIS HOPEFUL PUPILS
       X  OLIVER BECOMES BETTER ACQUAINTED WITH THE CHARACTERS OF HIS NEW
          ASSOCIATES; AND PURCHASES EXPERIENCE AT A HIGH PRICE. BEING A
          SHORT, BUT VERY IMPORTANT CHAPTER, IN THIS HISTORY
      XI  TREATS OF MR. FANG THE POLICE MAGISTRATE; AND FURNISHES A
          SLIGHT SPECIMEN OF HIS MODE OF ADMINISTERING JUSTICE
     XII  IN WHICH OLIVER IS TAKEN BETTER CARE OF THAN HE EVER WAS
          BEFORE.  AND IN WHICH THE NARRATIVE REVERTS TO THE MERRY OLD
          GENTLEMAN AND HIS YOUTHFUL FRIENDS.
    XIII  SOME NEW ACQUAINTANCES ARE INTRODUCED TO THE INTELLIGENT READER,
          CONNECTED WITH WHOM VARIOUS PLEASANT MATTERS ARE RELATED,
          APPERTAINING TO THIS HISTORY
     XIV  COMPRISING FURTHER PARTICULARS OF OLIVER'S STAY AT MR.
          BROWNLOW'S, WITH THE REMARKABLE PREDICTION WHICH ONE MR. GRIMWIG
          UTTERED CONCERNING HIM, WHEN HE WENT OUT ON AN ERRAND
      XV  SHOWING HOW VERY FOND OF OLIVER TWIST, THE MERRY OLD JEW AND
          MISS NANCY WERE
     XVI  RELATES WHAT BECAME OF OLIVER TWIST, AFTER HE HAD BEEN CLAIMED
          BY NANCY
    XVII  OLIVER'S DESTINY CONTINUING UNPROPITIOUS, BRINGS A GREAT MAN TO
          LONDON TO INJURE HIS REPUTATION
   XVIII  HOW OLIVER PASSED HIS TIME IN THE IMPROVING SOCIETY OF HIS
          REPUTABLE FRIENDS
     XIX  IN WHICH A NOTABLE PLAN IS DISCUSSED AND DETERMINED ON
      XX  WHEREIN OLIVER IS DELIVERED OVER TO MR. WILLIAM SIKES
     XXI  THE EXPEDITION
    XXII  THE BURGLARY
   XXIII  WHICH CONTAINS THE SUBSTANCE OF A PLEASANT CONVERSATION BETWEEN
          MR. BUMBLE AND A LADY; AND SHOWS THAT EVEN A BEADLE MAY BE
          SUSCEPTIBLE ON SOME POINTS
    XXIV  TREATS ON A VERY POOR SUBJECT.  BUT IS A SHORT ONE, AND MAY BE
          FOUND OF IMPORTANCE IN THIS HISTORY
     XXV  WHEREIN THIS HISTORY REVERTS TO MR. FAGIN AND COMPANY
    XXVI  IN WHICH A MYSTERIOUS CHARACTER APPEARS UPON THE SCENE; AND MANY
          THINGS, INSEPARABLE FROM THIS HISTORY, ARE DONE AND PERFORMED
   XXVII  ATONES FOR THE UNPOLITENESS OF A FORMER CHAPTER; WHICH DESERTED
          A LADY, MOST UNCEREMONIOUSLY
  XXVIII  LOOKS AFTER OLIVER, AND PROCEEDS WITH HIS ADVENTURES
    XXIX  HAS AN INTRODUCTORY ACCOUNT OF THE INMATES OF THE HOUSE, TO
          WHICH OLIVER RESORTED
     XXX  RELATES WHAT OLIVER'S NEW VISITORS THOUGHT OF HIM
    XXXI  INVOLVES A CRITICAL POSITION
   XXXII  OF THE HAPPY LIFE OLIVER BEGAN TO LEAD WITH HIS KIND FRIENDS
  XXXIII  WHEREIN THE HAPPINESS OF OLIVER AND HIS FRIENDS, EXPERIENCES A
          SUDDEN CHECK
   XXXIV  CONTAINS SOME INTRODUCTORY PARTICULARS RELATIVE TO A YOUNG
          GENTLEMAN WHO NOW ARRIVES UPON THE SCENE; AND A NEW ADVENTURE
          WHICH HAPPENED TO OLIVER
    XXXV  CONTAINING THE UNSATISFACTORY RESULT OF OLIVER'S ADVENTURE; AND
          A CONVERSATION OF SOME IMPORTANCE BETWEEN HARRY MAYLIE AND ROSE
   XXXVI  IS A VERY SHORT ONE, AND MAY APPEAR OF NO GREAT IMPORTANCE IN
          ITS PLACE, BUT IT SHOULD BE READ NOTWITHSTANDING, AS A SEQUEL
          TO THE LAST, AND A KEY TO ONE THAT WILL FOLLOW WHEN ITS TIME
          ARRIVES
  XXXVII  IN WHICH THE READER MAY PERCEIVE A CONTRAST, NOT UNCOMMON IN
          MATRIMONIAL CASES
 XXXVIII  CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF WHAT PASSED BETWEEN MR. AND MRS.
          BUMBLE, AND MR. MONKS, AT THEIR NOCTURNAL INTERVIEW
   XXXIX  INTRODUCES SOME RESPECTABLE CHARACTERS WITH WHOM THE READER IS
          ALREADY ACQUAINTED, AND SHOWS HOW MONKS AND THE JEW LAID THEIR
          WORTHY HEADS TOGETHER
      XL  A STRANGE INTERVIEW, WHICH IS A SEQUEL TO THE LAST CHAMBER
     XLI  CONTAINING FRESH DISCOVERIES, AND SHOWING THAT SUPRISES, LIKE
          MISFORTUNES, SELDOM COME ALONE
    XLII  AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE OF OLIVER'S, EXHIBITING DECIDED MARKS OF
          GENIUS, BECOMES A PUBLIC CHARACTER IN THE METROPOLIS
   XLIII  WHEREIN IS SHOWN HOW THE ARTFUL DODGER GOT INTO TROUBLE
    XLIV  THE TIME ARRIVES FOR NANCY TO REDEEM HER PLEDGE TO ROSE MAYLIE.
          SHE FAILS.
     XLV  NOAH CLAYPOLE IS EMPLOYED BY FAGIN ON A SECRET MISSION
    XLVI  THE APPOINTMENT KEPT
   XLVII  FATAL CONSEQUENCES
  XLVIII  THE FLIGHT OF SIKES
    XLIX  MONKS AND MR. BROWNLOW AT LENGTH MEET.  THEIR CONVERSATION,
          AND THE INTELLIGENCE THAT INTERRUPTS IT
       L  THE PURSUIT AND ESCAPE
      LI  AFFORDING AN EXPLANATION OF MORE MYSTERIES THAN ONE, AND
          COMPREHENDING A PROPOSAL OF MARRIAGE WITH NO WORD OF SETTLEMENT
          OR PIN-MONEY
     LII  FAGIN'S LAST NIGHT ALIVE
    LIII  AND LAST




CHAPTER I

TREATS OF THE PLACE WHERE OLIVER TWIST WAS BORN AND OF THE
CIRCUMSTANCES ATTENDING HIS BIRTH

Among other public buildings in a certain town, which for many reasons
it will be prudent to refrain from mentioning, and to which I will
assign no fictitious name, there is one anciently common to most towns,
great or small: to wit, a workhouse; and in this workhouse was born; on
a day and date which I need not trouble myself to repeat, inasmuch as
it can be of no possible consequence to the reader, in this stage of
the business at all events; the item of mortality whose name is
prefixed to the head of this chapter.

For a long time after it was ushered into this world of sorrow and
trouble, by the parish surgeon, it remained a matter of considerable
doubt whether the child would survive to bear any name at all; in which
case it is somewhat more than probable that these memoirs would never
have appeared; or, if they had, that being comprised within a couple of
pages, they would have possessed the inestimable merit of being the
most concise and faithful specimen of biography, extant in the
literature of any age or country.

Although I am not disposed to maintain that the being born in a
workhouse, is in itself the most fortunate and enviable circumstance
that can possibly befall a human being, I do mean to say that in this
particular instance, it was the best thing for Oliver Twist that could
by possibility have occurred.  The fact is, that there was considerable
difficulty in inducing Oliver to take upon himself the office of
respiration,--a troublesome practice, but one which custom has rendered
necessary to our easy existence; and for some time he lay gasping on a
little flock mattress, rather unequally poised between this world and
the next: the balance being decidedly in favour of the latter.  Now,
if, during this brief period, Oliver had been surrounded by careful
grandmothers, anxious aunts, experienced nurses, and doctors of
profound wisdom, he would most inevitably and indubitably have been
killed in no time.  There being nobody by, however, but a pauper old
woman, who was rendered rather misty by an unwonted allowance of beer;
and a parish surgeon who did such matters by contract; Oliver and
Nature fought out the point between them.  The result was, that, after
a few struggles, Oliver breathed, sneezed, and proceeded to advertise
to the inmates of the workhouse the fact of a new burden having been
imposed  upon the parish, by setting up as loud a cry as could
reasonably have been expected from a male infant who had not been
possessed of that very useful appendage, a voice, for a much longer
space of time than three minutes and a quarter.

As Oliver gave this first proof of the free and proper action of his
lungs, the patchwork coverlet which was carelessly flung over the iron
bedstead, rustled; the pale face of a young woman was raised feebly
from the pillow; and a faint voice imperfectly articulated the words,
'Let me see the child, and die.'

The surgeon had been sitting with his face turned towards the fire:
giving the palms of his hands a warm and a rub alternately.  As the
young woman spoke, he rose, and advancing to the bed's head, said, with
more kindness than might have been expected of him:

'Oh, you must not talk about dying yet.'

'Lor bless her dear heart, no!' interposed the nurse, hastily
depositing in her pocket a green glass bottle, the contents of which
she had been tasting in a corner with evident satisfaction.

'Lor bless her dear heart, when she has lived as long as I have, sir,
and had thirteen children of her own, and all on 'em dead except two,
and them in the wurkus with me, she'll know better than to take on in
that way, bless her dear heart!  Think what it is to be a mother,
there's a dear young lamb do.'

Apparently this consolatory perspective of a mother's prospects failed
in producing its due effect.  The patient shook her head, and stretched
out her hand towards the child.

The surgeon deposited it in her arms.  She imprinted her cold white
lips passionately on its forehead; passed her hands over her face;
gazed wildly round; shuddered; fell back--and died. They chafed her
breast, hands, and temples; but the blood had stopped forever.  They
talked of hope and comfort. They had been strangers too long.

'It's all over, Mrs. Thingummy!' said the surgeon at last.

'Ah, poor dear, so it is!' said the nurse, picking up the cork of the
green bottle, which had fallen out on the pillow, as she stooped to
take up the child.  'Poor dear!'

'You needn't mind sending up to me, if the child cries, nurse,' said
the surgeon, putting on his gloves with great deliberation. 'It's very
likely it _will_ be troublesome. Give it a little gruel if it is.'  He
put on his hat, and, pausing by the bed-side on his way to the door,
added, 'She was a good-looking girl, too; where did she come from?'

'She was brought here last night,' replied the old woman, 'by the
overseer's order.  She was found lying in the street.  She had walked
some distance, for her shoes were worn to pieces; but where she came
from, or where she was going to, nobody knows.'

The surgeon leaned over the body, and raised the left hand.  'The old
story,' he said, shaking his head: 'no wedding-ring, I see. Ah!
Good-night!'

The medical gentleman walked away to dinner; and the nurse, having once
more applied herself to the green bottle, sat down on a low chair
before the fire, and proceeded to dress the infant.

What an excellent example of the power of dress, young Oliver Twist
was!  Wrapped in the blanket which had hitherto formed his only
covering, he might have been the child of a nobleman or a beggar; it
would have been hard for the haughtiest stranger to have assigned him
his proper station in society.  But now that he was enveloped in the
old calico robes which had grown yellow in the same service, he was
badged and ticketed, and fell into his place at once--a parish
child--the orphan of a workhouse--the humble, half-starved drudge--to
be cuffed and buffeted through the world--despised by all, and pitied
by none.

Oliver cried lustily. If he could have known that he was an orphan,
left to the tender mercies of church-wardens and overseers, perhaps he
would have cried the louder.



CHAPTER II

TREATS OF OLIVER TWIST'S GROWTH, EDUCATION, AND BOARD

For the next eight or ten months, Oliver was the victim of a systematic
course of treachery and deception.  He was brought up by hand.  The
hungry and destitute situation of the infant orphan was duly reported
by the workhouse authorities to the parish authorities.  The parish
authorities inquired with dignity of the workhouse authorities, whether
there was no female then domiciled in 'the house' who was in a
situation to impart to Oliver Twist, the consolation and nourishment of
which he stood in need.  The workhouse authorities replied with
humility, that there was not. Upon this, the parish authorities
magnanimously and humanely resolved, that Oliver should be 'farmed,'
or, in other words, that he should be dispatched to a branch-workhouse
some three miles off, where twenty or thirty other juvenile offenders
against the poor-laws, rolled 